---
layout: post
title: Introduction to Computer Science
comments: true
categories:
- Computer Science
tags:
- formal languages
- theory
---
In the upcoming semester I'll be taking class called [Theoretical Computer
Science](http://www.fit.vutbr.cz/study/courses/TIN/ "TIN"). Which is said to be
_the hardest_ thing you can attend here at [BUT](http://www.fit.vutbr.cz/ "Brno
University of Technology"). Only half the people pass the bar every year. It's
brutal. And since I'd really like to be a part of the lucky half, I thought I
could dig into the theory a little earlier and see how bad it is.

So, **Computer Science**, right? What the hell is all that about? _Theoretical
computer science_ or _theoretical information technology_ (as referred by some
people) is a formal foundation for the things we like to call **computers**.
What computers do? They essentially compute stuff. Current computer hardware is
built and programmed to work with numbers. Who cares about a bunch of numbers?
But the numbers represent some sort of **information**. In broader terms,
computers work with information. A computer takes some information and
transforms it into another information. What Wikipedia says:

> **Computer science** deals with the theoretical foundations of information,
computation, and with practical techniques for their implementation and
application. Computer scientists invent algorithmic processes that create,
describe, and transform _information_ and formulate suitable abstractions to
model complex systems.

Right, so we have information. How do people work with these anyway? People
share their thoughts though **languages**. We talk and sometimes listen, we
also read and sometimes write. Other people like to draw, play charades or
sing. In all of these cases the information is encoded into some sort of
_language_ that others can understand. Sure, we're people, it comes naturally
to us, but what about the machines? A coffeemaker will most certainly not learn
to talk to you or even understand your needs. Machines are dumb. That's where
we (the nerdy guys from engineering department) come in with** formal
languages** -- a substantial part of computer science. By formalizing common
languages we make the machines understand our instructions.

Ever heard of a **programming language**? Programming language is basically a
sequence of instructions we use when we tell the computers what to do. It's a
language that we use when we talk to the computers. It sounds a little weird,
but that's it. Computer science sets up some ground rules so the computers can
algorithmically analyze the instructions and process them. It explores
possibilities of computers -- what can be processed by a computer? Is there
anything that computers can't solve, why? Bunch of interesting stuff.

Interesting, but sometimes very hard to understand. I wanted to put some
basics here too, but I don't want to scare you off too early. I got stuck for a
while with the very basics at first (I figured it out eventually). The math
will come in a stand-alone post shortly after.

Stay tuned ;-).
