---
layout: post
title: Brief History of Time
description: "Stephen Hawking writing in plain English."
cover: pub.jpg
comments: true
categories:
- Books
tags:
- philosophy
- physics
- space-time
- stephen hawking
- wave particle duality
---
I finished all my exams a little early this term (and thank god for that), so
I could dive right into the huge pile of book that had emerged on my desk
through the semester. The first one was **Brief History of Time** from [Stephen
Hawking](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Hawking) which is a very
interesting book.

Mr. Hawking talks about some interesting topics ranging from the very
foundation of physics, it's history and how our understanding of the universe
evolved over time. There was Aristotle, who thought, that everything consists
of the fiveÂ  elements (earth, water, fire, air and _aether_ - a divine
substance that makes up the stars and planets). Then came Sir Isaac Newton with
his laws and gravitation, Albert Einstein with theory of general relativity.
Now we have quantum mechanics and string theory, that are based on the
[wave-particle
duality](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wave%E2%80%93particle_duality).

<figure class="full">
	<a href="/assets/images/posts/brief-history-of-time.jpg">
        <img src="/assets/images/posts/brief-history-of-time.jpg" alt="Book cover">
    </a>
	<figcaption>
        Brief History of Time book cover
    </figcaption>
</figure>

The physicists went through all this in search of a **grand unified theory**,
a theory of everything, one concept that will define _the whole universe_. The
thing is, we're not there yet and it might take some time. There are still
things, that cannot be accurately described by the current principles of
quantum mechanics or string theory.

The book also explores black holes and their role the big bang (as the
beginning of the universe). I must admit, that I couldn't understand it all
when I read the book for the first time. Shame on me, I'll have to give it a
shot another time.

## (In)finite Space-time

Another interesting thing, that was introduced in the book is a concept of a
finite space with no beginning or end and how to imagine such a situation. You
see, in life, everything has a beginning and everything, at some point
eventually comes to an end. So it comes very hard to us to think in terms of a
space that is not infinitely large, but has no beginning nor ending. Well, the
example is right there! We live on it! Take for instance the surface of planet
Earth. It's definitely not infinitely large, but have you seen an end of the
world somewhere? 2D surface of a 3D sphere is an example of space of finite
size, but with no distinguished points of beginning or end. But how to extend
it by one coodrinate to 3D/4D? Can we apply this principle to the space-time
continuum or the time itself? Does it mean that our universe doesn't
neccessarily have a begining or end, that it just **is**?

## Entropy

Another interesting principle concerns closed systems' **entropy**. According
to the second law of thermodynamics, entropy of an isolated system increases
over time, it **never decreases**. Sounds familiar? Well, in case you're a
software engineer, I'm sure it does :-). By this law, code degrades and we
cannot do anything about it -- it's physics! Unfortunatelly, for all
spagheti-code producers, enthropy can also be reduced by increasing entropy
somewhere else e.g. (surprisingly) putting some work to the system ;-).

## It's pretty good!

There's a lot more interesting theorems, thoughts and principles from physics,
philosophy and many others areas of human knowledge. I think it's definitely
worth reading. Give it a shot!
