---
layout: post
title: FOSDEM 2013
description: My report from the Free and Open Source Developers' European Meeting.
cover: keyboard.jpg
categories:
- Linux
- Software
tags:
- Brussels
- conference
- linux
- LNST
comments: true
---
This year, I was given the opportunity to travel to Brussels to attend _the best
Free Software and Open Source event in Europe_, also known as The Free and Open
source Software Developers’ European Meeting (**FOSDEM**).

<img src="/assets/images/posts/fosdem-logo.png" alt="FOSDEM logo"
     class="pull-right" style="margin: 15px;">

It is one of the biggest open source conferences in Europe; it is a place where
the developers of many open projects from around the world come together to
have a beer and to talk about their progress. Over 5000 visitors come to
Brussels every year to see hundreds of talks organised to dozens of tracks.
It was actually my first time at an event this big. And it was great!

The main reason for our trip to Brussels was to present our project called
[LNST](https://fedorahosted.org/lnst/wiki "LNST Project Homepage") in the [Test
and Automation
Devroom](https://fosdem.org/2013/schedule/track/testing_and_automation/ "Test
and Automation Devroom Schedule"). Unfortunately, due to the travel
arrangements, we couldn't make it to the second day of the conference.
Nevertheless it was a great experience. Saturday was crammed with great talks
and they all seemed to happen at the same time! Hopefully, the organisers
managed to record most of them and will make them available online soon.

## Friday's Beer Event

The conference actually started on February 1st by the [beer
event](https://fosdem.org/2013/practical/beerevent/ "FOSDEM 2013 Beer Event")
in probably the largest pub I have ever seen -- the [Delirium
Café](http://deliriumcafe.be/ "Delirium Café Website"). It had at least 3
floors, all of which were full of geeks including a part of the street in front
of the pub. There was a really large variety of beers to chose from with
alcohol content going up to (and sometimes probably even over) 10%. I
personally liked Belgian beer. It is different from that we are used to in
Czech Republic, but in a good way.

<figure class="full">
	<a href="/assets/images/posts/delirium.jpg">
        <img src="/assets/images/posts/delirium.jpg" alt="Delirium Café">
    </a>
	<figcaption>
        Delirium Café in Brussels
    </figcaption>
</figure>

## Saturday's Talks

The official event was held at the **Université Libre de Bruxelles** (or ULB)
campus which is situated in southern Brussels. The first talks on Saturday
started mostly from 11:00, so there was some time to get yourself together if
you had overdone it with the beer the previous day. The first thing we did was
actually to get a coffee and a croissant. There was an improvised bar
conveniently at the campus, which was really nice.

<figure class="figure">
	<a href="/assets/images/posts/udb.jpg">
        <img src="/assets/images/posts/udb.jpg" alt="ULB Campus Brussels">
    </a>
	<figcaption>
        ULB Campus Solbosch, Brussels, Belgium.
    </figcaption>
</figure>

The first presentation we decided to see was about the architecture and the
recent developments of **GNU/Hurd** from Samuel Thibault in the  [Microkernels
and Component-based OS
devroom](https://fosdem.org/2013/schedule/track/microkernels_and_component_based_os/).
Samuel explained that Hurd is designed to provide as much freedom to regular
users as possible as the root has (accessing hardware being the notable
exception). For example, Hurd allows users to build and use their own TCP/IP
stack. Due to the modularity of the kernel, you can replace the majority of the
OS without even asking.

Then we decided to move to the
[Virtualisation](https://fosdem.org/2013/schedule/track/virtualisation/ "FOSDEM
Virtualisation Track") track to see a talk about virtual networking. We got
there late, and I must admit, that I really didn't understand the concept. On
the other hand, what was really nice were the
[stands](https://fosdem.org/2013/stands/ "FOSDEM Stands") in building K and AW.
They were usually overflowing with swag to take (or buy). **Red Hat** had a
Fedora booth there with [Jaroslav Řezník](https://twitter.com/RezzaBuh
"@RezzaBuh") and [Jiří Eischmann](https://twitter.com/Sesivany "@sesivany"),
giving out DVDs with **Fedora 18** (apart from other things). I got the
opportunity to try the new Firefox OS there. It looked okay, but only one of
the four buttons the phone actually worked. I am sure it will do better next
year :-).

Željko Filipin talked from 13:30 in the [Testing and Automation
Devroom](https://fosdem.org/2013/schedule/track/testing_and_automation/
"Testing and Automation Devroom") about the way **Wikipedia** is tested, which
was really interesting. They use a set of tools called
[Selenium](http://seleniumhq.org/) to automate web browsers. It provides Ruby
API to manipulate all the major browsers. This is very helpful during the
testing process, as it allows scripting unit and regression tests easily.

My talk about the **Linux Network Stack Project** was scheduled right after
that. I was really nervous about it, because it was my first serious public
speaking (and in English). I made it through without passing out, so I guess it
went well. Still, I am not sure whether I made everything as clear as I
possibly could. The devroom was very well organised (or at least that was the
impression I got when I entered) thanks to [R. Tyler
Croy](https://twitter.com/agentdero "@agentdero") and others who were running
it.

<span style="background-color:red;color:white;padding:3px;">Slides:</span>
You can download the slides I used for the LNST presentation
[here](/assets/lnst.pdf).

The last two talks I saw there were about the Linux kernel, both were part of
the [Operating
Systems](https://fosdem.org/2013/schedule/track/operating_systems/ "Operating
Systems Track") main track. In the first one, Thomas Petazzoni from **Free
Electrons** explained the challenges of ARM support in the kernel and described
how Linux deals with supporting different ARM-based SoC's. The very last talk
we attended was from the maintainer of I2C subsystem in the Linux kernel --
Wolfgang Sang. Wolfgang was talking about what it takes to be a kernel
subsystem maintainer. He explained how a person becomes one and then focused
mainly on his own experiences and how he prefers to do it.

Apparently, [RMS was
there](https://twitter.com/Sesivany/status/297751691128872960) attending the
conference, but unfortunately I didn't see him. $\*#.! Well, maybe next time.

## Brussels

There was no much time left, but we managed to get a while in the evening to
go buy some chocolate and have a look through the city. To me, Brussels is
something in the middle between **Prague** and **London**. They write
everything in two languages -- French and Dutch, but they seem to use French a
lot more. If you are hungry there, you can get a variety of things from Thai to
Spanish, Italian, and Mexican food. If you don't know, where to go, I can
recommend a great tex-mex restaurant called
[ChiChi's](http://www.chichis.be/brussels.html). As always, you can get a whole
lot of junk food from McDonald's. There are a couple of instances of Starbucks
in the city and an infinite number of other cafés to maintain proper caffeine
levels :-).

Anyway, it was both a great conference and a really nice trip. I hope, I will
be able to come next year as well!
