---
layout: post
title: "Digital For Good: Inspirations"
description: "The final night of the Bath Digital Festival"
cover: bath.jpg
comments: true
categories:
- Conferences
tags:
- Bath Digital Festival
- Conference
- Talks
---

The third year of the [Bath Digital
Festival](http://2014.bathdigitalfestival.com/) was held, well, in Bath,
starting on Monday 27th October. Many events took place during the Festival,
focusing on creativity, entrepreneurship and technology. I got a chance to
attend the closing night on Tuesday the 4th. The theme of the evening was
**Digital for Good**, and it indeed was very good.

The opening talk was delivered by **Doug Laughlen**, one of the organisers of
the festival. He introduced [Craneworks](http://craneworks.org/our-vision/), a
charitable project he’s involved in. The goal of this project is to renovate a
large abandoned factory and warehouse in Bath and turn it into a centre for
creativity and invention. Half of the complex should be occupied by offices and
the other half by a variety of creative spaces, for art and making. Craneworks
should become a creative beacon of the city and keep the young and talented in
the region.

<figure>
  <img src="/assets/images/posts/bathdigital.jpg" alt="Bath Digital Logo">
  <figcaption><b>Bath Digital</b>: The evil robot.</figcaption>
</figure>

Doug’s introduction was followed by **Mathew and me** talking about
[Kano](http://kano.me). Mat started off with telling the story of how the
company started and explained our ideas behind the hardware of the kit. I
stepped in for a moment and said something about the operating system and the
software that runs on it.

After a short break, **Richard Heath** and **Steve Fisher** took the stage to
talk about [WikiHouse](http://www.wikihouse.cc/), a collaborative effort to
design houses. It’s a global community architects, designers and engineers that
share their ideas and work on the designs together. As all the components are
made of timber by CNC-milling, anyone can come to their website, download the
blueprints and build a house.

Traditionally, architecture has been a domain of the wealthy. The general
public could rarely take advantage of it directly, apart from being able to
look at pretty buildings. One of the goals of WikiHouse is to bring
architecture closer to ordinary people.

Making the design process open to everyone allows for quicker iteration and
much more collaboration across disciplines. For example, the designers we’re
able to adopt some structural ideas from aviation engineering.

It’s interesting to see the philosophy of open-source expand beyond just
software and computing. Not many people would have expected structural
engineering project to become open-source. In fact, there are many disciplines
that could take advantage of this level of global collaboration. Projects like
WikiHouse will be much more common in the future.

Fast-forward to the next session where **Tom Steinberg** from
[mySociety](https://www.mysociety.org/) talked about power. How can the
internet affect the current distribution of power in the world? The answer is:
a lot. One of the examples Tom discussed was of the relationship between an
owner of a hotel and his customer.

In the past, customers picked hotels mainly based on brand. It was well
established that places like Hilton were usually pretty good. Unless you or one
of your friends had a personal experience with one of them, that was all the
information about a specific branch you could reasonably get. Hotel owners were
in a much better position, they had more power than their customers.

Today, there’s [TripAdvisor](http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/) and the situation
is a lot different. If you provide bad service, the customer will not like that
and possibly give you a bad review. And you can’t take it down. The power has
shifted in favour of the customers. There are many other examples, just like
this one.

The global network has become an important tool for exhorting power, in
politics and business, for good and bad. It’s much easier than it ever was to
gather people that share the same views. MySociety provides tools for people to
build communities and platforms. It helps them to be heard an get things
changed. They run sites like [FixMyStreet](http://fixmystreet.com),
[FixMyTransport](http://fitmytransport.com%5D), [WriteToThem](writetothem.com)
or [WhatDoTheyKnow](https://www.whatdotheyknow.com/).

**Aral Balkan** closed the evening with his talk called **SpyWare 2.0**. He
stressed out that many people are not aware of the business model of companies
such as Facebook or Google. They offer great services and employ thousands of
people all over the world to be able to do so, but everything is free of
charge. That’s odd.

Conspiracies aside, they make money by collecting information about you and
your habits, and using them to help other people sell to you better. You’re
being served _the content you might like_, or is it the content someone else
paid them to promote? It’s not easy to avoid using their services. Google
Search is one of the most essential tools on the internet today, it’s
convenient, works well and it’s free. It’s important to be careful as a user
and consider what you share with them.

The goal of Aral’s startup, [ind.ie](https://ind.ie/), is to build an ecosystem
that doesn’t rely on data collection to make money. They’ll use
[Pulse](https://ind.ie/pulse/), a distributed sync service to build a private
social network client called [Heartbeat](https://ind.ie/heartbeat/).
Ultimately, they would like to build a [phone](https://ind.ie/phone/), so they
can provide a complete experience, and of course, to drive their business. Over
the weekend, they launched a [crowdfunding campaign](https://ind.ie/) to be
able to make it happen.

It was an amazing evening, full of inspiration to do good. The technology we
have today isn’t good or bad on its own. It depends on us and how we use it.
Doing good doesn’t necessarily mean starting a charity. Many businesses are
fair to others, responsible towards the environment and they still make a good
living. If you’re looking to start one, your motivation can be to make as much
money as you can, but it could well be to make a very good living while helping
others. Your call.
