---
layout: post
title: FOSDEM 2014
description: "The best free and open source
conference in Europe."
cover: fosdem-2014.jpg
comments: true
categories:
  - Software
tags:
  - FOSDEM
  - conference
  - brussells
  - free software
---
The annual Free and Open Source Developers Meeting (better known as
[FOSDEM](https://fosdem.org/2014/)) took place in Brussels this weekend, and I
had the privilege to go there and be a part of it. It was my second visit to
this amazing conference, so I knew there was going to be beer, lots of
interesting talks, and a huge crowd of developers and hackers interested in
free software. This post is a summary of what I've seen there.

For those who don't know this event, FOSDEM is probably the biggest free
software oriented conference in Europe with more than 5000 people attending
every year. It takes place at the Université Libre de Bruxelles early in
February each year. It starts with a beer event in an epic place called
Délirium Café on Friday and goes on with more than 400 talks spread over the
weekend. In other words, it's massive.

#Friday Beer Event
As odd as it might sound, a conference full of free software hackers actually
starts with a social event. The venue of choice for the evening was a large pub
in the centre of Brussels called [Délirium Café](http://deliriumcafe.be/). It's
famous for their
[record-breaking](http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/2000/most-varieties-of-beer-commercially-available)
selection of beers (offering over 2000 different types).

The rules were set by a sign at one of the bars: **"No, there really
isn't any Wi-Fi. You'll have to talk to each other"**. Surprisingly enough, it
went quite well. The whole place was absolutely packed and a considerable
number of people were waiting outside in the rain, trying to get in. Speaking
of world records, at this time, Délirium Café probably becomes the place with
the world's biggest concentration of people who are able to write their own
device drivers.

For us, it was a lovely evening overall. We had a couple of pints and met a few
people. There were power and restroom failures during the night, but the beer
selection was a nice compensation for all that.

#Saturday's Talks
The first talk I went to see on Saturday was [Enlightenment as a Standalone
Wayland Compositor](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/enlightenment_standalone_wayland_compositor/)
by Stefan Schmidt and Chris Michael of Samsung. They are working on cleaning
[Enlightenment](http://www.enlightenment.org/) of any remaining X dependencies,
so it can be used as a Wayland compositor.

From there, I moved to the Legal devroom to listen to [Chris
Aniszczyk](https://twitter.com/cra), the Head of Open-Source at Twitter, to
talk about how his company works with open-source.  He talked about some of
their open projects, their policy to encourage Twitter employees to contribute
code upstream, and he also discussed his view of various open-source licenses.
Talking in favour of non-copyleft licenses, such as
[MIT](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT) or
[BSD](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BSD_licenses), he argued that
[GPL](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_General_Public_License) can be a barrier
to adoption of your project.

The next one for me was [State of the X.org
Foundation](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/xorg_foundation/) by its
board member Martin Peres. At the moment, the foundation consists of roughly 80
members and has raised enough money to be able to operate for at least 5 more
years. I was a bit confused here by the fact they worked really hard to
acquire a nonprofit corporate status and then got rid of it.

Next up was Manuel Bachmann offering insights on [porting legacy X11/GL
applications to
Wayland](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/porting_legacy_x11_to_wayland/).
I was really looking forward to seeing this talk, because I would love to see
Wayland run on the Raspberry Pi. Apparently, it's not that simple. The
functionality of X11 doesn't match exactly the functionality of Wayland. Some
things (such as window minimisation) can only be achieved through additional
libraries (xkb in this case). The good news is that all the major toolkits
(GTK+ 3.8 and higher, Qt5) already support Wayland. For GL, you'll need to
migrate from **GLX** to the **EGL** API.

Wolfgang Sang
[demonstrated](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/making_the_linux_kernel_better/)
how to add support for new hardware to the kernel by searching the [Linux
Kernel Driver Database](http://cateee.net/lkddb/web-lkddb/) for existing drivers
and matching them to new devices of similar nature. I really like this kind
of crowdsourcing. The developers ususally hobbyists and volunteers don't always
have all the devices available.

I stayed on the main track in Janson for the next talk by Red Hat's Tom Tromey,
who explained how can you [extend and
customise](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/your_application_versus_gdb/)
**gdb** using small scripts in Python. It looked really powerful. You can do
all sorts of things with that, such as results filtering, pretty-printing, and
probing. These are especially useful when debugging higher-level languages, such
as C++, where the output of gdb is usually very hard to read and understand.

We went to check out the lighting talks track for a while where Jean-Michel
Philippe introduced a distro specifically designed for children to learn about
computers. That was really interesting for us, because we're essentially trying
to do the same thing in [Kano](http://kano.me/). He showcased some really cool
apps and projects for kids even as young as 2 years old. The goal of the
project is to provide children with tools for their self-fulfilment and to show
them what is possible to do with computers. I love that mission, because that
is exactly what we're trying to do. Tech-savviness is really hard to teach to
others. You have to get them interested enough to teach themselves.

The last talk for Saturday was (again) about Wayland, this time about the
[status of GPU offloading](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/wayland_gpu/)
by Axel Davy. I was really excited about that one as well, but I have to admit
that I was really exhausted at this point that I could barely understand. You
can find more information in the
[slides](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/wayland_gpu/attachments/slides/364/export/events/attachments/wayland_gpu/slides/364/GPU_offloading.pdf).

#Sunday's Talks
The second day of the conference was packed with a massive number of talks,
just as the first one. Unfortunately, I didn't manage to get up before 9, so
the first talk I went to see on Sunday was [Considering the Future of
Copyleft](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/futurecopyleft/) by Bradley
Kuhn at the legal and policy issues devroom. He talked about the current trend
of moving away from copyleft licenses, such as GPL, to the more permissive ones,
e.g., MIT or BSD. [GitHub](http://github.com) is a big advocator of MIT. And in
fact, Chris Aniszczyk was advocating permissive licenses from a perspective of
[Twitter](http://twitter.com) in the same room on Saturday. It makes sense for
companies and especially startups, but it means the user actually gets less
freedom. **LLVM** could potentially become the an example of the permissive
license abuse. The compiler is licensed under the
[UoI/NCSA](http://opensource.org/licenses/UoI-NCSA.php) license, which is quite
similar to **MIT**. Apple has been a big contributor to it, however, there is
no obligation for them to keep releasing their code. Although it doesn't make
much sense now, in a couple of years when (and if) LLVM sees wider adoption,
they might start shipping proprietary premium extensions and additions to it.
And there won't be much we'll be able to do about it.

Incidentally, the next talk I went to see was [How to contribute to
LLVM](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/contributellvm/) by Sylvestre
Ledru. This one was a bit more practical; Sylvestre explained the tools and
processes the community around LLVM uses. I was really surprised by the fact
that they use **subversion** for such a big project. I hated it already after a
month of using it for a project at the university. Apart from that they use
[Phabricator](http://llvm.org/docs/Phabricator.html) for code reviews.

[Laurent Sansonetti](https://twitter.com/lrz), former Apple employee and a
founder of [HipByte](http://hipbyte.com), was talking about [Statically
compiling Ruby with LLVM](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/llvmruby/)
short while after that. His company develops
[RubyMotion](http://www.rubymotion.com/), a LLVM-based Ruby toolchain that
allows writing native iOS and Mac apps in Ruby. Laurent is the original author
of [MacRuby](http://macruby.org/), which is a AOT and JIT for Ruby on Mac.
RubyMotion seems to be a continuation of the effort extended to iOS. They have
some pretty impressive customers using their toolchain including
[37Signals](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/id599139477) and
[Lines](http://getlin.es/), the London Underground status app. The whole
project has around 12.5k lines of C++ code and Laurent discussed some of the
ways it utilises LLVM. I would love to try writing Ruby apps for iOS, but I
can't justify spending £125 for a weekend-hacking-fun toolchain at this point.

One floor down from the LLVM devroom was the Python one. Saying it was packed
there would be a severe understatement. It was bloody mental, it was. We
couldn't get in for the [talk about
PSF](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/the_next_generation_psf/) and after
queueing for an half an hour outside, we barely managed to squeeze in for
[Romain Guillebert's](https://twitter.com/rguillebert) [How PyPy makes your
code run
fast](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/how_pypy_makes_your_code_run_fast/).
PyPy is an interpreter and just-in-time compiler for Python. PyPy is written in
[RPython](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PyPy#RPython), which is a restricted
subset of the Python language compiled to C. The interpreter has much more
flexibility to perform optimisations that cannot be done in AOT compilers, and
produce much more efficient machine code. Romain showcased a real-time
implementation of edge-detection on his webcam (using the Sobel's algorithm) in
both PyPy and CPython. The difference was huge. However, there are still some
limitations. PyPy doesn't work well with C extensions and there is only a
partial support for GUI libraries.

After PyPy, I moved to the main track to listen to Ric Wheeler, the manager of
the kernel storage team ad Red Hat, to talk about [Persistent
Memory](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/persistent_memory/). While in
the past, memory was either slow and persistent, or fast but volatile, the
technology now starts to bring the best of the two worlds together. There are
persistent data storage devices already available that run on very high speeds
that are here to stay. Starting with SSDs, DRAMs with a battery pack, DRAMs
with flash memory attached, and even wilder ideas and approaches.

However, due to the speed of traditional disks, the kernel's
IO stack is full of optimisations that are specific to rotational drives that
might become inefficient or even harmful to performance. Be it the 4k page
size limit, the CFQ scheduler, or even individual file systems. Giving more
options to developers will certainly come with a lot of challenges to be solved
all the way through the IO stack.

Ric also mentioned
[SMR](http://www.hgst.com/science-of-storage/emerging-technologies/shingled-magnetic-recording),
which is a technology that seems to be coming to rotational drives. These
drives work best with continuous read/writes rather than random accesses, so in
order to get the benefits, we might need to bend the file system drivers quite
a bit.

Torvald Riegel and Nuno Diegues talked about [transactional
memory](https://fosdem.org/2014/schedule/event/concurrent_programming_made_simple/)
in the same room. Transactional memory is a programming abstraction that aims
to simplify concurrent programming, which is becoming much more ubiquitious. It
is way of transparently guaranteeing the atomicity of operations in shared
memory without having to worry about locking on the application level. The
operations are grouped to transactions which are atomic. It is supported in the
**C11 standard** and it was added to gcc in version **4.7.0**. The presenters
stressed that it is just a tool and not a magical solution to all problems with
concurrency.

This brings me to the very last talk I had the chance to see at **FOSDEM** this
year. We went back to the Python track to listen to Romain Guillebert again to
talk about PyPy. This time, it was a very brief introduction of what it is and
how it works. He was also answering lots of questions from the audience in the
second part of his segment.

#Summary
It was a pretty tiring but an awesome weekend. There are certainly not many
conferences like FOSDEM. I learned so many new things, got up-to-date with
the advances of many open projects and initiatives, and got lots of ideas as
a result. We tried a few belgian beers, waffles and some chips. So if you're
wondering whether it's worth going next year, it is (at least for the beer).

Anyway, if you couldn't make it to Brussels this time, the video team started
uploading the first [recordings](http://video.fosdem.org/2014/) already and I'm
sure all of them will be available for download shortly.
