---
layout: post
title: "My notes from LNUG November 2015"
description: ""
comments: true
categories:
- Programming
- Software
tags:
- Node.js
- meetup
- LNUG
- JavaScript
---

Craft beer, two rounds of tasty pizza, bunch of friendly people and three talks
about Node.js. That’s [LNUG](http://lnug.org/) — a monthly event for
server-side JavaScript enthusiasts in London.

Following a brief change of venue in October, the group moved back to the
familiar Stack Overflow offices of Bentima House at Old Street this Wednesday
to meet for the last time in 2015. How did it go?

## MVP Diagrams that can do things

[Matt Forrester](https://github.com/forbesmyester) kicked off the evening with
an interesting talk about making diagrams. Simple illustrations are an
invaluable tool for conveying complex ideas on paper as well as email or Slack.
But it can take a while to make one with the typical GUI tools for that purpose.

First, Matt showed a few ways of quickly making diagrams using
[GraphViz](http://www.graphviz.org/) and Mike Daines’s
[viz.js](https://github.com/mdaines/viz.js) library which brings it to the web
(see the live demo [here](http://mdaines.github.io/viz.js/)).

Then he went to introduce his spare-time project called [DB
DiaYAML](https://github.com/forbesmyester/db-diayaml) — a handy tool for
drawing database diagrams with just a few lines of YAML. Without having to
worry about the layout or formatting, you simply provide the names of your
tables, fields and links and get the finished diagram.

Check out [Matthew’s
blog](http://keyboardwritescode.blogspot.com/2015/07/weekend-project-db-diayaml.html)
to learn more.

## A JavaScript to C++ transpiler!

The second one to take the stage was
[Fábio Santos](https://twitter.com/fabiosantosart) (mind the á) to speak about
his [JS to C++ transpiler](https://github.com/fabiosantoscode/js2cpp) written
in CoffeeScript. Yeah, that’s right.

Fábio noted that this toy project was inspired by the similarities between
C++11 spec and JavaScript. So far, it can transpile functions using simple data
types like numbers and strings. `console.log`, recursion, closures and objects
are also supported.

The highlight came later on in the talk when Fábio did the **EPIC `FIB()`
BENCHMARK** (calculating the first 45 numbers in the Fibonacci sequence). The
transpiled version brought the V8 to it’s binary knees and was about 3 times
faster.

Check out the [repository on GitHub](https://github.com/fabiosantoscode/js2cpp)
to learn how it works.

## Scaling Node.js using Docker

[Ben Hall](https://twitter.com/Ben_Hall) delivered the last talk for the
evening about using Docker to scale Node-based services over several CPUs and
machines. If you deploy on a multi-core machine, you aren’t really using its
full potential since Node.js always runs in a single process.

To make use of the extra CPUs, you can change your `npm start` to spawn several
processes (based on the number of cores), each one listening on a different
port. To make them look like a single one from the outside, Ben uses an nginx
proxy that distributes requests amongst the processes (like
[this](https://serversforhackers.com/using-nginx-as-a-load-balancer) — link
added by me).

To scale the setup even further, you can make it into an Docker image and
deploy to several machines in a cluster with [weave](http://weave.works/) in
front of it to do the load balancing.

Ben uses this approach to run the [Katacoda.com](http://katacoda.com/) learning
platform for developers.

## The end

Anyone with some residual upper-body strength (despite the programmer's
lifestyle) helped to carry the tables out of the side room to recreate the
cafeteria that normally is there. The crowd thinned as people finished their
conversations and collected the last stickers from the desk opposite the
reception. In the end, the braver ones headed to the Old Fountain for more
craft beer goodness.

That was LNUG November 2015! Many thanks to [Ian Crowther](http://twitter.com/iancrowther)
and all the [organisers](https://github.com/orgs/lnug/people) for another year
of great meetups for fun or profit. See you all next year!
