---
layout: post
title: "Crazy hippies and evil corporations: Open source software in the commercial world"
short_title: "Open source software in the commercial world"
description: "Open source for business"
comments: true
categories:
- Programming
- Open Source
tags:
- software
- open source
- software industry
---

In early 1980s, personal computers started spreading into households and with
that came demand for more software. It separated from being an accessory that
came with the computer and a whole new industry begun to emerge with companies
such as Microsoft focusing on it as their primary source of revenue. Its
complexity increased rapidly and so did the costs of making it. For
those companies, source code became their main business asset, a treasured
secret upon which the fate of the company depended (or so they thought at the
time).

Three decades later, the industry is established and doing well, but it's also
very different. What has changed and what remains the same?

## Freedom? What about it?

Most consumers don't really care, but for programmers not being able to look
how a program works is a big problem. How else are you supposed to learn all
the skills and best practices when you'll see the code only _after_ being
hired? And even then you'd probably get access to one file after signing your
soul away in a non-disclosure agreement.

As a concerned user, how do you to check whether the software on your computer
is doing what it's supposed to and not being harmful?

One of the first people being openly annoyed with this was Richard Stallman. In
mid-80s, he started a movement with a goal to make an entire operating system
that would be free from the restrictions imposed on software by the companies
at the time. Learn more about it in one of my [previous
posts](http://radek.io/2015/07/06/fs-vs-os/).

{% include figure.html img="os-in-commercial-world/gnu.png" alt="Logo of the GNU project" width="50%" caption='The logo of the GNU project.' %}

Over time, Stallman's [GNU project](https://www.gnu.org/home.en.html) attracted
lots of attention from hackers and devs, and [much
controversy](http://news.cnet.com/2100-1001-257001.html&tag=mncol%3btxt) from
corporate software makers. His passion and moral views that all
software in the world should be free was important to get the conversation
going, but since all the commercial software was proprietary at the time,
it brought the movement a reputation of a bunch of crazy hippies.

## Open collaboration

But not everyone was so dismissive of the idea. A few people realised the
benefits that open collaboration can have for businesses.

The technology in the software industry is rarely the goal. It's just means to
an end, and programs serve millions of different purposes. Considering the
speed at which the whole industry moves, does it make sense to spend so much
competing on technology that will be out of date next year? Why not collaborate
on it so we can focus on the products and services that we can make of those
instead?

{% include figure.html img="os-in-commercial-world/osi.png" alt="Open Source Initiative" width="50%" caption='The logo of the Open Source Initiative.' %}

In 1998, a group of free software supporters decided to rebrand the movement,
freeing it from the moral views and highlighting the benefits that working
together has for business. That's when the term **open source** was born and it
became an important first step in making the two polar opposites see how could
they work together. The times were still difficult though. With much of the
power in the hands of companies, the danger of community driven projects being
exploited by them was still present.

## Evil corporations

There are companies that do take advantage from open source projects, with or
without breaking the terms of the licence. Companies that use and modify
community projects and never give back and others that may actively abuse or
try to harm them.

The famous [Embrace, extend and
extinguish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Embrace,_extend_and_extinguish)
strategy used by Microsoft or
[TiVoization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tivoization) courtesy of the
eponymous video recorder company are examples of such ethically questionable
behaviour. Did it work well for them? TiVo got a giant lawsuit out of it and
look at the popularity of Microsoft's Internet Explorer and the notoriously
problematic `doc` and `docx` formats. The first time people get chance to get
rid of them they will. Is that a good position for your business to be in?

{% include figure.html img="os-in-commercial-world/bill-gates-paul-allen.jpg" alt="Bill Gates with Paul Allen amongst IBM computers" caption='Bill Gates with Paul Allen amongst IBM computers.' %}

The decades of campaigning of the free software and open source movements and
the possibilities of open collaboration on the internet and sites like
[Github](https://github.com) have brought free and open source software to the
mainstream. The powers have shifted away from the companies and participating
in open source is now the way software is done.

New generations of programmers, the 90s kids and millennials all have been
using open source right from the beginning when they started to learn. Will
they choose to work for a company that keeps their software all closed or will
they prefer to take part in the community on their company time? Not even
mentioning the benefits of building a reputation and knowing people around the
community for job hunting. And the choice is there _right now_.

Being able to attract a community of developers is good for business and it
will get even more important in the future. The benefits for code quality,
hiring and company culture are too sweet to be missed. And there's an
incentive to play fair, because if things become dodgy, people will fork the
project or just walk away.

## Proprietary code as the necessary evil

As controversial as it may sound, the current plethora of open source software
would be hardly possible without proprietary software. Companies that rely on
closed source software have released or sponsored as many incredibly popular
projects as individual contributors. These include Bootstrap (Twitter), Linux
kernel (many different contributors), Firefox (originally based on Netscape
Navigator), Chromium (Google), Go (Google) or Swift2 (to be released by Apple).

The problem is that opening everything doesn't work very well if you need
people to pay you at the same time. It's worked for Red Hat in the enterprise
market, but not everyone can pull off selling support as successfully as they
can, especially when targeting the consumer markets.

If you ever downloaded LibreOffice or Gimp and liked it, did you then send a
similar amount of money you'd pay for the proprietary alternatives to the
developers, so they can invest more time in making it better? No? That's fine,
because that's not how the economy works. Leaving the outliers aside, the
average consumer doesn't pay much when it's optional.

But programmers, designers and even managers need to eat and someone has to pay
for the golf club membership of the executives. As much as I don't like it,
proprietary software has its own place in the industry and it does support many
open projects through funding.

What we need is to strike the right balance.
