---
layout: post
title: "Free software vs. open source: What's the difference?"
description: "Hairy hippies and evil corporations."
comments: true
categories:
- Programming
- Open Source
tags:
- software
- open source
- licensing
---

If you're a newcomer to the community, these terms can be confusing. Many
people use them interchangeably, yet supporters of either draw a clear line of
distinction between the two. What do these mean? Why are there two? And what
is the difference? These are the questions I'll be looking at today, because
the answers are not entirely obvious.

## Free Software

_Free software_ is a brainchild of [Richard
Stallman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Stallman), a man of great
passion and reputable beard. He's the father of the GNU project and founder of
the free software movement of over 30 years ago that were born of
his frustration with the limitations of proprietary licenses imposed
on users by companies at that time. Software grew more complicated and became
an expensive endeavour which lead companies to treating the source code as
their asset, making everything they could to keep it private. And while that
might have looked like a good idea for business (or so they thought at the
time), it wasn't great for their users and developers.

{% include figure.html img="fs-vs-os/rms.jpg" alt="Richard Stallman" width="50%" caption='Young Richard Stallman (Source: <a href="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Richard_Matthew_Stallman.jpeg">wikimedia.org</a>)' %}

The [definition](http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.en.html) states that a
program is considered to be _free_ as long as its users have the freedom to:

<ol start="0">
  <li>run it,</li>
  <li>study it,</li>
  <li>redistribute it,</li>
  <li>improve it and release the improvements to the public.</li>
</ol>

The idea behind these essential freedoms is to **put the user in control**
of their computer and the software they run, not the manufacturer of it.

Strongly associated with free software is the principle of
[copyleft](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyleft). Free software on its own
doesn't implement any mechanism to make sure it will _remain free_. Someone
could get a copy, modify it and distribute without the same freedoms
as the original author did. That worried Stallman and that's one of the reasons
why the idea of _retaining the freedoms_ became an important principle of the
free software movement.

Just as copyright ensures that nobody distributes the content without
permission, copyleft ensures that nobody will distribute free software
**without retaining all of its freedoms**. This is accomplished through the
licence under which the software is distributed. Depending on the terms,
this requirement may extend onto the whole software package and to other
packages which interface with the copylefted program. Under some licenses,
you're not even allowed to make calls to copyleft libraries if your module
is proprietary.

A typical example of a copyleft license is the [GNU General Public
License](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html).

Mind you that at no point there wasn't any mention of price. Everyone can
redistribute free software and it's entirely their choice whether they ask
money for it. As Richard's Stallman famous phrase goes: "It's free as in
freedom, not beer."

## Open Source

Christine Peterson coined the term _open source_ at a meeting of a group of
people from the free software movement in California in 1998, following the
release of [Netscape
communicator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netscape_Communicator). They met
with the goal to bring the ideas and benefits of free software to the
commercial software industry.

They saw the social activism and moral implications of free software to be a
barrier for comercial adoption. To illustrate Richard Stallman's attitude: he did say
at some point that proprietary software is _a crime against humanity_. It's not
difficult to see why businesses might be reluctant to consider the benefits of
free software over such claims. After all, most of the software was proprietary
at the time.

The group decided to rebrand the movement, highlighting the benefits that
sharing and collaborating on code has for businesses.

The [definition of open source](http://opensource.org/docs/osd) bases heavily
on the principles of free software, yet its philosophy is fundamentally
different. There are [ten criteria](http://opensource.org/osd) that a project
must meet in order to be considered open source.

In a nutshell, the project's source code must be available to everybody without
discrimination and restrictions, with the right to modify and redistribute it.
Contrary to free software, the open source movement doesn't implement copyleft
to enforce that these are retained. Strangely enough, this gives the users of
your software a little more freedom, letting them integrate any open source
project with proprietary code without restrictions.

Examples of licenses endorsed by the open source movement include the
[MIT](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT) and
[BSD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BSD_licenses) licenses; both short and
permissive.

## Summary

The free software movement strives for the ideal that all software in the world
should be free. Ideals, however, are often hard to implement in practice and
that's where open source comes in. Richard Stallman summarised the difference
in one sentence: "Open source is a development methodology; free software is
a social movement."

What's important is that after decades of hard work between both movements, the
ideas of freedom and open collaboration are no longer a thing for a bunch of
socially awkward hippies to talk about when they leave their dingy basements.
These _are_ the mainstream and ignoring them means seriously missing out.

Last year, we saw Microsoft, the past [arch enemy of
openness](http://news.cnet.com/2100-1001-257001.html&tag=mncol%3btxt) release
the sources of their [.NET and Visual
Studio](http://blogs.msdn.com/b/somasegar/archive/2014/11/12/opening-up-visual-studio-and-net-to-every-developer-any-application-net-server-core-open-source-and-cross-platform-visual-studio-community-2013-and-preview-of-visual-studio-2015-and-net-2015.aspx).
The [Microsoft GitHub account](https://github.com/Microsoft) has close to 200
repos on it. Apple, who's known for their politics of control, will be
making [Swift 2 open source](https://developer.apple.com/swift/blog/?id=29)
later this year. And this trend is here to stay.

**Question**: Which philosophy is closer to your heart? The ideals of free
software or the unrestricted accessibility of open source? Share your
thoughts in the comments section below.
