---
layout: post
title: "Setting up a Debian repository using dr"
description: "A guide to setting up a small deb repo"
cover: gallery.jpg
comments: true
categories:
- Programming
tags:
- Debian
- software
- packaging
- Linux
- Ruby
---

**dr** is a repository management tool that aims to simplify the process of
releasing packages for smaller and niche projects based on Debian. From
versioning and building your packges to managing releases and serving them
to your users. This post explains how to set it up.

Given the variety of technologies, languages and build systems Debian supports,
the packaging system became rather complex. That users can type a command and
get a ready-made piece of software installed on their system is a result of
strict processes and lots of different tools, many of which you might need to
learn to create a package and set up a repository yourself.

**dr** hides away some of the flexibility of the system in favour of
simplicity for the needs of small Debian-based projects that need a way of
releasing and maintaining several customised packages on top of the
distribution.

In a nutshell, **dr** takes your _source package_ from a git repository,
builds it and publishes it in it's own archive that you can put up online
for people to download the packages from. To learn more how it works, see
the
[readme](https://github.com/KanoComputing/kano-repository-manager)
and
[project wiki](https://github.com/KanoComputing/kano-repository-manager/wiki)
on GitHub. And now, let's see how to get it working.

## Install

{% capture noteText %}**dr** still is an experimental tool. I'm sorry if you
come across any issues and would be grateful if you took time to report them
[here](https://github.com/KanoComputing/kano-repository-manager/issues).
{% endcapture %}
{% include note.html colour='red' head='HEADS UP' text=noteText %}

The main app is distributed via [RubyGems](https://rubygems.org/gems/dr) and
can be installed using the gem command:

{% highlight bash %}
sudo gem install dr
{% endhighlight %}

It builds on top of many external tools, such as _debootstrap_, _debuild_ and
_reprepro_, which you should install too. On Debian, you'll
need the following packages (it can differ a little on Ubuntu and others):

{% highlight bash %}
sudo apt-get install git reprepro gzip tar devscripts \
                     debootstrap coreutils curl gnupg \
                     dpkg dpkg-sig sudo qemu-user-static \
                     rng-tools
{% endhighlight %}

Make sure all of these are installed before moving on to the next step.

## Configure

You can configure **dr** at two places. Edit the `/etc/dr.conf` file for
system-wide settings and the `~/dr.conf` for adjustments on per-user basis.
Both of them are simple YAML files and at the moment, there are only two
reasons you might want to change them.

#### Add build environments

**dr** comes with two predefined
[environments](https://github.com/KanoComputing/kano-repository-manager/blob/master/lib/dr/build_environments.rb)
for building packages: Debian Wheezy and Kano OS. Chances are that
you'll need to build for other distros such as Jessie or Ubuntu as well.
If so, you'll have to define the build environment for your distribution of
choice in the configuration. This step is important so your package is build
against the correct set of dependencies.

Here's how a build environment configuration may look like. The following one
is for Debian Jessie:

{% highlight yaml %}
build_environments
  name: "Debian Wheezy"
  arches: ["x86_64"]
  repos:
    wheezy:
      url: "http://ftp.uk.debian.org/debian/"
      key: "https://ftp-master.debian.org/keys/archive-key-7.0.asc"
      src: true
      codename: "wheezy"
      components: "main contrib non-free"
  base_repo: "wheezy"
  packages: []
{% endhighlight %}

#### Set the system-default repo

The number of **dr** repositories that can be hosted on the same server is
unlimited and there are often good reasons to have more than one: to have a
staging and production environments and to make your package available for
several distributions perhaps. In such cases, you'd have to keep passing the
path to the **dr** command to let it know where your repo is.

To make it easier, **dr** allows you to set up aliases for each repo and
select a default one. It can be done in the config file as follows:

{% highlight yaml %}
default_repo: "production"

repositories:
  - name: "production"
    location: "/home/radek/repos/production"
  - name: "backup"
    location: "/home/radek/repos/backup"
{% endhighlight %}

This configuration defines names for two repositories, `production` and
`backup`, and makes the former the default one. It's not necessary to set up
names for your repositories if you don't want to, but then you'll have to type
`dr --repo=~/repos/production` with every command invocation.

## Initialise a repository

With **dr** successfully installed and configured, it's time to initialise
your first repo. During the process, **dr** will, create the basic directory
structure and generate signing keys.

Before going forward, start the following command which will make sure there
is enough entropy available on the system when the GPG pair is generated:

{% highlight bash %}
sudo rngd -f -r /dev/urandom
{% endhighlight %}

Keep **rngd** running in the background, pick a good place to put the repo on
your file system and start the initialisation:

{% highlight bash %}
dr init ~/example
{% endhighlight %}

**dr** will ask you to fill in a few details about the repository such as,
to pick the architectures it should support and select the default build
environment. It may look something like this (the yellow values in the brackets
are the defaults that will be used if you leave the field blank):

{% include figure.html img="dr-setup/dr-init.png" alt="" width="75%" caption="<strong>dr init</strong>: Setting up a repository" %}

It's important to get these right, because most of these cannot be changed
later on and you might have to recreate the repository from scratch in case of
error.

The **Build environment** and **Architectures** options depend on the target
distro of your repository on which the packages are ment to be installed on.
This could be Debian or any flavour of it, perhaps Ubuntu or Mint and it's
currently limited to **one per repository**. If you want to distribute your
package to both Debian and Ubuntu, you'll need to set up two separate repos.
If the build environment isn't correct, your package may be built against the
wrong set of libraries and might not be compatible with the target system.

Select as many architectures as you like, but keep in mind that each package
will be built for each architecture separately, which can increase the build
times.

You may group your packages into several **Components** and release in three
**Suites**, to each of which you can assign a **Codename**. Please refer to
Debian's [official manual](https://wiki.debian.org/RepositoryFormat) to learn
what they mean exactly.

## Add and build

Once the repository has been set up to your needs, we can proceed to adding
packages into it. **dr** is most useful when you keep your sources in git.
If yes, just pass the URL of the repo to it using the following command:

{% highlight bash %}
dr add --git git@github.com:KanoComputing/kano-toolset.git
{% endhighlight %}

**dr** will clone the repository, look through the packaging files which must
be present in the `debian/` folder and get it ready for building.

{% capture noteText %}This guide doesn't cover how to prepare your sources
to be compiled into a Debian package. Please refer to the
[official guide](https://wiki.debian.org/HowToPackageForDebian) instead.
{% endcapture %}
{% include note.html colour='green' head='NOTE' text=noteText %}

To actually build your package, run the **dr build** command as follows:

{% highlight bash %}
dr build kano-toolset
{% endhighlight %}

The very first time you build a package with a new repo, the build will take a
long while because **dr** needs to set up the buildroots. They are cached, so
it will be much swifter next time.

Before each build, **dr** runs `git pull` to make sure the sources are up to
date and it won't build again if nothing changed from the last one. You also
don't need to worry about vesioning. **dr** appends a date-based build tag to
the version string, which will make each subsequent build of your package
compare higher than the previous one, forcing `apt` to reinstall it (unless
you downgrade the upstream or deb versions).

{% include figure.html img="dr-setup/dr-build.png" alt="" width="75%" caption="<strong>dr build</strong>: Compile the deb file from sources" %}

Both of the commands have additional options. Check out the help to learn more:

{% highlight bash %}
dr help add
dr help build
{% endhighlight %}

#### Prebuilt packages

You can use **dr** to manage packages that were built elsewhere too. If
you prefer a different way of generating your `*.deb` files, you can still use
this app to manage them in a repository. Including them is just as easy.
Use the following command:

{% highlight bash %}
dr add --deb raspberrypi-linux_3.12.24-1.20141028_armhf.deb
{% endhighlight %}

**dr** will unpack the archive and get all the information it needs
automatically. It will also sign it with the repository key.

## Release

With the packages built, the next step is to push them into the archive -- a
directory with a prescribed structure from where `apt` on your user's machines
will be able to retrieve them. **dr** lets you to push your packages in three
suites:

* stable
* unstable
* testing

Remember, you have assigned a codename to each of them when we started. You
can push a build in one or more of these suites. The only limitation is that
there cannot be two builds of the same package in the same suite. That's why
there are more of them. For example, if you want to ship the throughly tested
version of `kano-toolset_1.3` to users, you'd push it into the **stable** suite.
But you might want to release a newer one for testers too, in which case it
would go to **unstable**. And when you're working late at night on something
highly experimental that you need to test, you can push it to scratch and
conveniently install on your test box in the lab.

This is how to push a package to push a package into a suite:

{% highlight bash %}
dr push kano-toolset --build 2.0-1.20150522 --suite unstable
{% endhighlight %}

The builds can be moved around, so you can push the new version from
**unstable** to **stable** after it got enough testing without rebuilding
it and risking a random bug. Since that is a common scenario, there's a
dedicated command to push packages from **unstable** to **stable**:

{% highlight bash %}
dr release kano-toolset
{% endhighlight %}

You can use the **list** command `dr help list` to display what builds of
the package are where:

{% include figure.html img="dr-setup/dr-list.png" alt="" width="75%" caption="<strong>dr list</strong>: One build can be a part of multiple suites." %}

## Publish the archive

Once you get your package built and pushed into at least one suite, you'll
need to publish the archive on the internet to make it accessible for other
people.

**dr** comes with a basic web server built in. Use this command to start it:

{% highlight bash %}
sudo dr serve -R /archive
{% endhighlight %}

By default, it will bind to `0.0.0.0:80` for which root permissions are required
(hence the use of sudo). Use the `-R` option to specify the root route on
the server.

{% include figure.html img="dr-setup/dr-serve.png" alt="" width="75%" caption="<strong>dr serve</strong>: Starting the web server." %}

And this is how it looks in the browser:

{% include figure.html img="dr-setup/browser.png" alt="" width="75%" caption="<strong>Browser</strong>: The repository structure in the browser." %}

## Use the repository

When the server is up and running, the final step is to figure out how to use
it to install packages and what to tell the users if they want
to access the repo.

There are three entries that you can put into your `source.list`, based on
which suites you want apt to use:

{% highlight text %}
deb http://192.168.122.101/archive stable main
deb http://192.168.122.101/archive unstable main
deb http://192.168.122.101/archive testing main
{% endhighlight %}

Using all of them at the same time is fine; apt will always get the latest
version of each pacakge.

Apart from that, you'll need to add the repository's public key into your key
ring. Notice the **repo.gpg.key** file in the screenshot above. To add it
use this command:

{% highlight bash %}
curl http://192.168.122.101/archive/repo.gpg.key | apt-key add -
{% endhighlight %}

And that's it, the only thing that separates you now from installing the
package on your system is running `apt-get update`:

{% highlight bash %}
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install kano-toolset
{% endhighlight %}

## Conclusion

So this is how you make a Debian repository with **dr**. Thanks for sticking
with this monster of a tutorial till the very end. I hope you found it
useful!

If you want to know more, there are other resources available on [the project
wiki](https://github.com/KanoComputing/kano-repository-manager/wiki) giving
a little more detail. In case you're unsure about something or run into
problems, you're more than welcome to ask on [our gitter
channel](https://gitter.im/KanoComputing/kano-repository-manager) or [open an
issue on GitHub](https://github.com/KanoComputing/kano-repository-manager).
