---
layout: post
title: "The future of open source for programmers"
description: ""
comments: true
categories:
- Programming
- Software
tags:
- future
- open source
---

Github -- the most popular hosting provider of open source projects was founded
seven years ago. It brought the ideas of free software to a much broader
audience, particularly of younger programmers and undoubtedly made a
mark on the way we see open source today.

But it's not the only thing that changed. Open source is now _the way_ software
is done. [Over 70% of companies](https://www.blackducksoftware.com/future-of-open-source)
run on open source and giants like Facebook, Twitter or even Microsoft release
new projects in dozens, bringing up an entirely new set of challenges for the
open source world. What will the next seven years look like for programmers?

## Code and community

Code is obviously an important part of every open source software project.
Particularly in the beginning, it's the reason why a group of people gathers to
work together and start a community.

Programmers are passionate about their work which makes code a source of
numerous rows and squabbles that can send
[shockwaves](http://www.linuxinsider.com/story/81262.html) through communities
of thousands. As the father of the Linux Kernel himself once wrote:

> Talk is cheap. Show me the code.
> â€”Linus Torvalds ([LKML](https://lkml.org/lkml/2000/8/25/132 "Linus Torvalds's famous quote"))

But it's the **community** that makes open source great. Without it, the code
is just code. When no one cares, does it really matter whether it's open source
or not?

We release new open source projects hoping that people will find it useful and
maybe jump in and start making them with us. If the code is the only thing you
release, chances are that not many people will show up.

Having a good documentation ready, quick guides written up, being polite and
respond to questions in timely manner are few things that can help you build
and maintain a healthy community around your project. These things used to be
the difference between _good_ and _bad_ open source projects. But in the
future, they be the thing that will separate the ones that make a difference
from the ones that nobody will notice.

Needless to say, managing a community isn't easy and it might not be what a
programmer expects to be doing when releasing code out to the public. Whatever
the popularity of your project, if your community is not welcoming or poorly
managed, people will just move somewhere else. There are plenty of options
already.

Open source software is more of a social enterprise that it seems.

## From openness to accessibility

As the opening paragraph hints, companies don't hold back when releasing their
projects to the public. With large players like
[Facebook](https://github.com/facebook) (137),
[Twitter](https://github.com/twitter) (130) or even
[Microsoft](https://github.com/microsoft) (206) leading the pack with hundreds
of public repositories, the competition for the attention of developers is
fierce.

Just a few weeks ago, IBM
[announced](https://www.digitalnewsasia.com/business/ibm-launches-open-source-platform-to-release-50-projects-to-the-community)
that it will be dropping off 50 projects out in the open. With that strategy,
it's safe to say that they won't see a heaving rabble of developers, hitting
their servers with spears sharpened and keyboards at the ready to contribute.

The work only begins when you make your project open and it will most certainly
take time before IBM's truckload of stuff builds a following if at all.

The open source world is moving on to solving the lack of **accessibility**
instead of the lack of **openness**. Is your project really open source when
you're the only one in the world that can understand it?

## Open source careers

Many pieces were written on the subject of [technical
interviews](http://thenextweb.com/entrepreneur/2014/03/11/technical-recruiting-broken-4-ways-hire-better/)
[being broken](http://erniemiller.org/2013/09/19/interviews-are-broken/). Open
source is one way to solve this issue over the next few years.

Companies such as [Workshape](https://www.workshape.io/) already look at the
applicants's Github profiles and match them with suitable employers. There's no
reason why this couldn't go even further to evaluating someone's abilities
based on the work they did within the open source community.

Seeing a person at work on an open source project gives you much better idea of
how good they are than having them reverse a binary tree on a whiteboard.

On the other side, many engineers will recognize the value of working in the
open. Being able to contribute to open source projects gives you an opportunity
to work outside your team, break the stereotype and learn from people you would
have otherwise never met, often very good programmers. Being able to build a
portfolio of open source contributions while on the job might soon become a
requirement of jobseekers in the industry.

## Summary

The surge in popularity of open source software amongst both companies and
individuals in the past few years has brought many changes to the way we
understand open source. But it would be foolish to think that what it is now is
what it always will be.

Never before have programmers enjoyed so much power over software vendors and
had so much resources freely available to them. On the other hand, the steep
rise in quantity makes it increasingly more difficult to succeed when releasing
new projects and it will be even tougher in the future, possibly increasing the
gap between individual and company backed projects that can actively market
them.

What do you think the open source world will look like in 2022? Post your
thoughts in the comment section below or tweet at
[@radekpazdera](https://twitter.com/radekpazdera).
