---
layout: post
title: "Printing images in the terminal with 9&nbsp;lines of Ruby"
description: "Including pictures of cats in your scripts with ease."
comments: true
categories:
- Programming
- Open Source
tags:
- software
- Ruby
- terminal colours
- tco
---

There are many ways to bringing graphics into the text-based environment
of the terminal. They range from libraries like curses to ASCII art, clever use
of characters based on their visual intensity and terminal colours. This one
is based on the last approach and makes it as simple as 9 lines of Ruby.

Let's go straight to the code:

{% highlight ruby %}
require "tco"
require "rmagick"

img = Magick::Image::read(ARGV[0]).first
img.each_pixel do |pixel, col, row|
  c = [pixel.red, pixel.green, pixel.blue].map { |v| 256 * (v / 65535.0) }
  pixel.opacity == 65535 ? print("  ") : print("  ".bg c)
  puts if col >= img.columns - 1
end
{% endhighlight %}

This example combines two gems: [rmagick](https://rmagick.github.io/) to read
the images and [tco](https://github.com/pazdera/tco) to map their pixels from
RGB to the extended colour palette available in most terminals. It goes through
each pixel and just writes it out using tco's string extension that sets the
appropriate background colour. A pixel is approximated with two blank spaces,
so the results depends on the proportions of your console font.

The conditional on line 7, which will leave out all completely opaque pixels,
in case your image is a PNG with transparent background.

And this is how it looks:

{% include figure.html img="catpix/picatchu-script.png" alt="Pokemons in the terminal" width="75%" caption="<strong>Pokemon</strong>: Woot!" %}

## The `catpix` gem

I extended the above code with a few more features like automatic downsizing of
the image based on the width of the terminal window, centering and adding custom
background colours and turned it into a small gem called
[catpix](https://github.com/pazdera/catpix).

{% highlight ruby %}
require 'catpix'

Catpix::print_image "pokemon.png",
  :limit_x => 1.0,
  :limit_y => 0,
  :center_x => true,
  :center_y => true,
  :bg => "white",
  :bg_fill => true
{% endhighlight %}

Find the full description of the API is at
[RubyDoc](http://www.rubydoc.info/github/pazdera/catpix/master/Catpix.print_image).

Here's one more example with a photo of some flowers in my window, straight from
my phone that was downsized to fit by catpix:

{% include figure.html img="catpix/photo.png" alt="My window in the terminal" width="75%" caption="It's the 21st century. Of course it's responsive." %}

## Is this really good for anything?

The possibilities are endless! Although the resolution of terminal screens
usually isn't that good, which is somewhat limiting. Still, here
are a few ideas you might or might not want to use.

### 1. Rickroll people in the terminal

People won't fall for your
[Rickrolls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rickrolling) as easily nowadays. Like
[this guy on
Reddit](http://www.reddit.com/r/videos/comments/2dnbbz/a_sad_day_indeed_the_original_rick_roll_video_has/),
you need to be increasingly more creative to pull one off. From now on, you can
bring them into the terminal, where people expect them the least:

{% include figure.html img="catpix/rickroll.png" alt="Rick Astley" width="75%" caption="<b>Rick Astley</b>: Never gonna give you up, never gonna let you down..." %}

### 2. Access denied

Do you feel that the one-line error just isn't enough to make it clear to users
that credentials are required to perform this operation? Let Gandalf do the
talking instead:

{% include figure.html img="catpix/wrong-password.png" alt="You shall not pass" width="75%" caption="<b>Gandalf the Grey</b>: You've got two more tries mate." %}

### 3. Wrong usage

People keep getting the command line options wrong, even through they make
perfect sense? Like `-d` to create a file or `-r` to write into it. Maybe
they'll learn faster if you add this:

{% include figure.html img="catpix/wrong-usage.png" alt="Facepalm" width="75%" caption="<b>Patrick Stewart</b>: Oh dear..." %}

### 4. Something went wrong?

Indeed, some error messages aren't easy to pass to the user. No matter how many
times you ask them to back up their files, they'll never do it. If something
like this happens, take some pressure off your customer service team by
sugarcoating the message a little:

{% include figure.html img="catpix/whoops.png" alt="Fluffy kitty" width="75%" caption="<b>Chester</b>: Please don't kill me!" %}

## What's next?

I would love to see your ideas on using images in the terminal. Post them in
the comments below or tweet at
[@radekpazdera](https://twitter.com/radekpazdera).

You'll find the [catpix](https://github.com/pazdera/catpix) and
[tco](https://github.com/pazdera/tco) gems on GitHub, both licensed under MIT.
Enjoy!
