---
layout: post
title: "FOSDEM 2016: What I learned"
description: ""
comments: true
categories:
- Conferences
tags:
- Free software
- Open source
- FOSDEM
---

The annual European gathering of open source enthusiasts took place in Brussels
this weekend. For the fourth time, I had the chance to take part in these two
days of lectures and conversations with fellow developers from around the world
about freedom, sharing and open collaboration. Here's what I learned there.

{% include figure.html img="fosdem-2016/fosdem-logo.png" alt="FOSDEM logo" width="60%" %}

{% capture noteText %}I wrote a short piece about this conference for
**Opensource.com** earlier this month. [Read it here](https://opensource.com/life/16/1/fosdem-2016).
{% endcapture %}
{% include note.html colour='green' head='WHAT IS FOSDEM?' text=noteText %}

## sysdemd

[Lennart Poettering](http://0pointer.de/lennart/) delivered his annual
[systemd](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Systemd) update to an audience of over
1,500 filling up the largest auditorium at the campus at 10AM on Saturday.
Quite an impressive feat, considering that many people returned from the Friday
beer event in the small hours of the morning.

In 2015, many distributions adopted systemd as their primary init system,
including Debian and Ubuntu. Things are going well and the project is becoming
an even more important part of the ecosystem.

The maintainers moved the codebase from Freedesktop to
[Github](https://github.com/systemd). Even though many people aren’t the
biggest supporters of the platform, it has brought the project better
visibility and the highest number of contributors in history.

Lennart summarised the progress made on different components in 2015 and hinted
where the work will go this year. A lot happened in
[networkd](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/systemd-networkd) and
distributions begun adopting it already, even though it isn't finished yet.
In 2016, we should also see the implementation of DNSSEC in
[resolved](http://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd-resolved.service.html)
being completed.

## Open source design

I sat in the open-source design room for the best part of Saturday’s afternoon,
listening to some very inspiring talks from people who contribute to open
source, but don’t write any code.

### Open source in the UK government

Bernard Tyers told the audience how they build [gov.uk](https://www.gov.uk/), a
collection of government services and information in the UK. I love the site
and it has helped me many times in the past. So it amazed me to hear that they
publish their sources freely [on Github](https://github.com/alphagov).

As one of the first government services in the world,
[GDS](https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/government-digital-service)
started focusing on user’s needs rather than their own and they ingrained this
philosophy into all design thinking across the platform. Over the past four
years, they managed to consolidate many public offices under the centralised
and accessible Gov.uk portal. Some departments welcome their help, others find
change more difficult. In a few cases, the policy itself stands in the way of
usability as the wording must be accurate and law certainly isn't renowned for
clarity.

Although their processes aren’t quite open to contributors yet, it’s great to
see so much voluntary transparency in a government organisation. And who knows?
A few years down the road, we might be able to commit to the
homepage of a country. How cool is that?

Check out the
[slides](https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/event/osd_osd_in_uk_government/attachments/slides/1134/export/events/attachments/osd_osd_in_uk_government/slides/1134/fosdem_2016_open_source_design_in_the_uk_government_bernardtyers.pdf)
to learn more.

### Designing with and for developers

[Belén Pena](https://twitter.com/belenpena) took the stage after Bernard to
speak about her experiences working with developers on the [OpenEmbedded
project](http://www.openembedded.org/wiki/Main_Page) — a tool for building
custom Linux distributions for embedded systems.

Being the only design person on the project, she faces interesting challenges
as the project is developed in the open and targets programmers — a highly
technical audience.

Learning the subject domain makes better designers. Belén spent 2 years
learning git, she joined the mailing lists and hangs out with the devs on IRC
which helps her understand their work and needs.

Despite the maintainers being also the target audience for her designs, she
stressed the importance of reaching out to other users to avoid
**maintainer bias**.

Find her slide deck
[here](https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/event/osd_designing_with_and_for_developers/attachments/slides/973/export/events/attachments/osd_designing_with_and_for_developers/slides/973/designing_with_and_for_developers.pdf).

### Designers vs. developers

How can designers and developers work better together? [Hollie
Lubbock](https://twitter.com/hollielubbock) answered this question in the next
presentation, drawing from her experiences designing digital products.

Design isn’t about things being pretty, but about serving the users. The best
brands will see people identify through owning or using a product (like Apple
or Airbnb).

People perceive the quality through the small details and for high-quality
products, these **details become the product**.

One of the worst things a designer can do is to finish her work and hand it over
to developers to implement. Without making the devs part of the feedback loop,
you're at risk of making incorrect assumptions. After all, they're the people
who will turn your vision to reality.

Hollie suggested pairing up designers and developers, just as copywriters and
art directors cooperate in design agencies. Designer and developer can
prototype rapidly and make sure all the proposed interactions are feasible for
a given platform. The designer will also be able to make sure none of the
important details get lost on the way.

Her
[slides](https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/event/osd_designers_vs_developers/attachments/audio/1025/export/events/attachments/osd_designers_vs_developers/audio/1025/Hollie_talk_fosdem_2016.pdf)
as well as an [audio
recording](https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/event/osd_designers_vs_developers/attachments/audio/1024/export/events/attachments/osd_designers_vs_developers/audio/1024/Hollie_talk_fosdem_2016_key.zip)
of her talk are available at **FOSDEM.org**.

### Designer's compromises in open source

[Ecaterina Moraru](https://twitter.com/evalica) spoke about the odds and ends
of doing design for open source projects. Even though it’s improving, designers
are nowhere near as common contributors to open source as developers. That can
make your job easier and a lot more difficult. There usually isn’t anybody
around to give you task, so you’ll need to find your own. Depending on your
skill level, this can be a liberating or rather intimidating experience.

Since your proposals will be approved and implemented by the maintainers of the
project, it's not difficult fall for maintainer bias. They're the people who
decide what gets done. Explain your thinking process and work with them to
keep the design user-centric.

See Ecaterina's
[slides](http://www.slideshare.net/valicac/designers-compromises-in-open-source)
for more.

### Overcoming your designer ego

Over the three decades that free software has been around, developers worked
out their de-facto standards for decentralised and open collaboration.
Maintainers, committers, git repos, bug trackers, wikis, mailing lists and IRC
channels — many projects have at least a few of these.

Open source is certainly no longer seen as just code, but contributing as a
designer can be still more difficult. Not as many designers work in the open
so things can be a bit all over the place.

[Elio Qoshi](https://twitter.com/elioqoshi) from Mozilla, who presented this
session, suggested that designers coming to open projects can struggle with
empathy sometimes. They might not be taking into account developers’s points
about feasibility or not willing to share their workflows and thinking with
others at the expense of losing some of the credit.

He stressed that even if you don’t use open tools, it’s important to share your
work in open formats and license it properly so others can chip in.

{% include figure.html img="fosdem-2016/janson.jpg" alt="A snap from the lecture room" width="80%" caption='The Janson lecturing room' %}

## JavaScript micro-benchmarks

In the evening, I moved to the Mozilla devroom to listen to [Hannes
Verschore](https://twitter.com/h4writer)’s lecture about micro-benchmarks in JS.

Discussion boards and Stack Overflow questions are full of speed comparisons of
different optimisations and algorithms. These isolated benchmarks often show
dramatic differences in performance, yielding a clear winner that people will
use.

Unfortunately, it’s not as simple. Compilers do a range of optimisations based
on many characteristics of the entire program. They can rearrange instructions
and run them in parallel. Changing the environment alters the way the compiler
will optimise your code and ultimately affect the results.

But what to do if micro-benchmarks don’t work? Hannes suggests profiling your
scripts and focusing on algorithms instead. Micro-optimising in high-level
languages is a moving target as the compilers change all the time.

## GPLv4 and Affero LGPL

Tom Marble interviewed [Richard
Stallman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Stallman) — the founder of the
Free Software Foundation and the man who gave the conference its 'F — in the
Legal and Policy Issues room on Sunday morning. They touched many topics about
licensing and the philosophy of free software and open source.

{% include figure.html img="fosdem-2016/rms.jpg" alt="Richard Stallman and Tom Marble" width="80%" caption='Tom Marble interviewing Richard Stallman.' %}

Stallman said that he regretted not making GPL self-updating like the [Creative
Commons](https://creativecommons.org/) licences. This would give projects the
option to switch to later versions of the licence without having to ask for
permission of all individual contributors first. He had thought that the
community would reject that idea but it worked out quite well for CC. There
are no plans to make GPLv4 at the moment but the update clause would be one of
the things the FSF would consider for it.

Good news for all supporters of the [Affero
GPL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affero_General_Public_License): [Bradley M.
Kuhn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bradley_M._Kuhn) of Software Freedom
Conservancy is working on the 'Affero' version of
[LGPL](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/lgpl-2.1.en.html).

### Distributions

The distro devroom had a series of interesting sessions that kept filling it up
throughout both days of the conference. I made it to two on Sunday.

## SUSE studio

In the first one, Jan Krupa spoke about [SUSE Studio](https://susestudio.com/),
the recently added features and what will come in the future (see the
[slides](https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/event/suse_studio/attachments/slides/1109/export/events/attachments/suse_studio/slides/1109/fosdem_2016_susestudio_jkrupa.pdf)).

SUSE Studio lets you build customised _appliences_ — Linux images with specific
packages and configuration — in the browser. It supports a variety of image
formats and cloud deployments, and you can even boot the image in your browser
window via the test drive feature.

Over the past two years they added an API and webhooks to help with automation,
increased the performance of the test drive and dropped support of http, making
the site https-only.

## Core OS

[Redbeard](https://twitter.com/brianredbeard) presented a short intro to
[CoreOS](https://coreos.com/) — a Linux distro for massive server deployments.

Core OS supports atomic updates. It keeps two read-only copies of `/usr` and
when an update arrives, it's applied over the unused one. The OS then boots
into it, leaving the old working and untouched. If something goes wrong, the
system will boot back into the original state and retry the update.

{% include figure.html img="fosdem-2016/coreos.png" alt="Core OS logo" width="60%" %}

Brian said that they were exploring the option of automatic updates similar to
the way Chrome installs updates. People aren’t very good at updating, but
running up-to-date software is critical in large-scale production environments.

He also explained how they use systemd, etcd, rkt, docker, locksmith and
kubernetes. Check out the video when it comes out!

## tl;dr

As always, I missed a few great sessions due to overcrowding or schedule
clashes. But that’s what happens when more than 5000 hackers get together for
600+ talks over the weekend. I drunk Belgian beer, ate waffles and saw the
beautiful Grand Place in the heart of Brussels. It was lots of fun.

Thanks to the organisers and all the volunteers who made this event possible. I
hope to see y’all next year!

Don’t worry if you couldn’t make it this year. Most of the sessions were
recorded and will be published in the following weeks
[here](https://video.fosdem.org/2016/). Check out the
[schedule](https://fosdem.org/2016/schedule/) and pick what sessions would you
like to watch.

{% include figure.html img="fosdem-2016/thanks.jpg" alt="Thanks for listening" width="80%" caption='Thanks for listening!' %}

Thanks for reading! [Sign up for my newsletter](/newsletter/) to be the first
to know when my next post comes out.
